Okay, let's just, you want to just talk? Well, I'll
tell you the first story. Did you grow up here in
Rockdale? Huh? Did you grow up here in Rockdale?
Yeah, I was born in Schulenburg, and my daddy
moved, we moved to Rockdale when I was two years
old. Two years old? Two years old, and I've been
here in Milam County ever since. Have you enjoyed
it? I guess so.
Everybody that ever lived up here And you'll be
eighty? Eighty-one? I'll be twenty-fifth of this
September, I'll be eighty-one. Okay. This coming
September. But the startin' of it is, my daddy's
from over there, he's from Germany. My daddy and
mother come from Germany. Do you remember what
part of Germany? Well, my daddy come from Bulgaria
and my mother come from Austria. Okay. And that was
when they Oh, long years ago when they'd take them
four or five maybe a month to come across on these
slow boats, ships. And I had four sisters and one
brother, and I'm the only one that's left.
How'd you get along with four sisters? Well, they
was all older. See, I'm the youngest one of them.
They was all older than me. My brother Frank, he up.
He worked around there, but he was grown. I'd run
around them Mexican boys and went swimming in all
them damn places, and I learned how to talk, but I
didn't get no education. You can go out there and
you can see me talking to a Mexican, you can't tell
me from a Mexican. And a lot of people said, God
damn, Willie. And I'd go out there and hold a
conversation with them, just like me and you'd be
talking. So you learned Spanish pretty young? Oh,
yeah, I learned when I was a kid. I'd grown up with
them. I got tickled over that when I went over to the
temple. I had two young Mexican doctors, and they
examined me over there, and they got to talking.
They walked over, and I told them, I said, they left
the first part of 17. That got me out of the sea. I was
supposed to go to the Army, but they let me off on
account of my wife. I had three kids. So you worked
in the mine during World War I? Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Did... See, I went to work down there when I was 16
years old. I was working under my daddy on the
outside on top. We wasn't paying 15, 20 cents an
hour. That's all we were getting them days. That's
all you were getting? Yeah. What were the Mexicans
getting in there? Well, they were getting so much,
they were getting two bits of... They hold from 18
to 20 tons. 18 to 20... I don't know what you call it,
but they had a brass check. Brass tag. Brass tag,
and they put their tag every time they get one
loaded. The mule and the mule driver would come and
put them out, and when they went over there, they'd
get their tag, and they'd note how many you got and
how many you... Each man had a different number.
Right, right. But did they make more a day than you
did working up top? Well, it was according to how
they felt about it. Some of that lignite was pretty
hard and some was pretty hard, soft. They'd make
all the way from $3 to $4. If they made $4 a day, that
was good money them days. How much did you make a day
about? When I was getting, when I went to work from
down there, when I started running energy,
because the wages went up, I started $75 a month,
straight time. When I was running the engine,
that's what they paid me. Did you work all year
long, or was it a seasonal time? No, I worked all
year long. There'd come a time where they'd have to
lay off some of them, but me and I was the head of the
running engine. See, they usually have water and
stuff in their mind, and they had these steam
pumps. And I worked sometimes. I worked seven days
a week, nine, ten hours a day.
When the war was going on, the Second World War,
man, they were doing pretty good business. Dr.
Sparks told me that he made, he said, little
Willie, I said, I cleared $30,000 during the war.
That's World War I? Yeah. And after he died, well,
everything began to go down. Well, did they have
teams or gangs that worked together in the mines,
or? No, they all worked separate. Individual?
Yeah, individual. They weren't no such a thing as a
union or something. A man or something get killed,
they just feed his wife three or four months, give
her groceries, paid her long till she got somebody
else. They never did. Did they sing in the mines at
all, or, you know, sometimes you read about old
mining stories up in Virginia. Oh, they done
everything around them gold mines. Oh, did they?
Yeah. Like what? We used to get out on Sunday
morning, they used to give me 50 cents a dollar an
hour to watch them so they could gamble. They'd put
me up in one of them outfits, pay me, see the law come
and tip them off. They lose a lot of money that way, I
guess, on gambling either way. They had it made,
though, after that. They had a pretty good law that
you can throw it on your damn knees to catch you. So
Dr. Barclay was a doctor out there. Dr. Barclay?
Dr. Barclay. You know him? Barclay or Barclay? Dr.
Barclay. Barclay. Barclay. He's dead now. He's a
doctor. So Dr. Sparks paid him.
A single man would pay 50 cents a week. And he paid
the doctors. He'd take it off our wages and pay the
doctor. Then if he called us, it didn't cost us
nothing. I see. Only when a woman had a kid or
something, we'd pay $10 extra. I see. He hired him.
He was a coal mine doctor. He'd had them little
cars. He had a little Ford automobile in. He'd come
out there in his Model D and he'd doctor us. Did you
ever get hurt while you were mining? Well, there
was an explosion. There was one barter blowed up
over there. That was at the Kiroga mine. And I got a
car up there now where the wall exploded and there
was four of us around it, but we was lucky that
didn't one of us get killed. Were you around in 1913
when the mine shaft caved in and the seven people
were... Yes sir, I was there. I can show you a man
right now that wasn't but 12 or 13 years old. But
he's nearly gone now. He's pretty sick. He lives in
town. Is that Jose Morales? Yeah. Is he still
alive? He's still alive, but they say he's just
about gone. I heard the other day that he was in a bad
shape. His wife died here about two years ago. Oh,
I'm sorry to hear that. He's in a bad shape now, too,
and he ain't even as old as I am. No, he's only about
79, I think. Because he was trapped down there for
six months. Yeah, he was down here, him and his
brother and his daddy. Mm-hmm. There was three of
the families down in there. And they all got out?
Yeah.
There was eight of them down there, and this
fella... You see, they were... Them coal mines run
like the land runs. That lead... In them mines
that... Maybe they'll be going downhill one time
and up the hill the next. Just like... They come
down the side. So these fellas, some way or
another, they got... When it caved in, they must
have got air from where the water went in, you see.
It was in a creek-like. That's where the water went
in, and they were above where the water didn't get
to them, and they got air through the hole that
caved in. Because all down there in the shaft, it
was 80 foot deep, and it was half full of water in
there. One old man, he went back to get his clothes,
and he laid down there, and the water got around
him. Of course, he couldn't get no breath. It
killed him. Did you help dig them out? Well, I was
down there. They made little shafts like a well.
They got their work day and night and taking time
about till they got over there. They surveyed
these places off, you know, so you know where your
land is. And they went down taking them, I think
nearly seven days to get down where them fellas
was. Yeah, there was a mule down there with them.
They went to clean it up because that mule said he
got on all fours. It was full of mud, you know, that
washed in there. Said they got close to that mule
and that old mule got snorted at him and wanted out
so bad. That mule had to stay in there. That mule
stayed in there nearly two months. But they got
food to him, you see. They got the men out through
that hole, but they couldn't get the man out. But
you take them that long, you know, to clear the mud
and stuff up that was in the shaft. Did they take the
mules in and out of the mines? Yeah, they put them in
every morning and take them out every evening.
Okay. Somebody had told me up in Milano today that
they just left the mules down there. No, they never
did. They always put them down every morning. I'd
run the engine down there and lay down seven mules
in the morning. She said we worked nine, ten hours
them days. I see.
Well, you said that you lived in one of those mining
shacks for a while. Was this before you were
married? Oh yeah, I was raised out there. See, I
lived out there in one of them old... See, they
built these little plank huts. Maybe a room or two.
And they had these stoves in there, a cook stove. We
used wood. And the coal mining owners would give us
the... In the wintertime, we'd have these hot
heaters. that we'd use that lignite in these
heaters and cut, use wood. They'd give us the wood.
There wasn't no such thing as electricity or
nothing like that out there them days. No gas, no
electricity, nothing. But we had to live on just
what we had to make. So you lived right there with
the Mexican families? Yeah, I lived right next
door to them. What were they like? They were good,
I'll tell you one thing. If they liked it, they'd do
anything in the world for you. Sometimes one of
them would get sick or something, we'd all
collect. Of course, we wasn't able to give them
much. One of them would get sick, we'd all put 50, 60
cents, maybe a dollar in there for him to go to the
hospital or something like that. One of them died,
we'd all collect money to buy, have his funeral
fixed. I was out there, my wife was operated in 23,
and they made up 150 dollars. asking them, them
that didn't have money, they brought grocers up
there. We was all good about that. Well, did they
cook inside their shacks or did they cook outside?
No, I tell you, they'd go down there in the morning
and the wives would cook the dinner, bring it, and
we'd let it down to them. Oh, I see. They cooked in
their little houses. Nearly all of them had wives.
And all about 1130, they'd start bringing their,
they'd have these little dinner buckets. Mm-hmm.
They'd fix them dadgum tortillas and beans and
stuff. Well, did you go to school when you were
growing up out there? Well, when I went to Top of the
Ridge, we had to walk about three miles, but I
played hooky so damn much. It wasn't going, and I
never got no education. Well, I understand that
the Mexicans had their own schools. Oh, yeah, they
had their Gussie Vogel, the one he was talking
about. She taught them out there for a long time.
The Mexicans had their extra school. They didn't
go to white school. So I guess he was the one who
taught them English. He taught them English.
Where did most of the Mexicans come from? Do you
know where most of the Mexicans came from? They
are. I tell you, they'd get together and go to
Laredo, and they'd get permission to bring a bunch
of them across. Permission from whom? From Mexico
to come across. Did they get permission from the
United States government also? Yeah. See, they
couldn't get no white people. Them days, you
couldn't get nobody. All the white people was
farming and working on these farms, and they'd get
a bunch of these mess kids in here. What about
blacks? Did the Negroes work down the mines pretty
much? Who? The black people? Well, there was quite
a few but they all lived in town. They never lived at
them coal mines. They'd go, they'd walk back and
forth. But they did work in the mines? Yeah, they
did work. Sometimes four or five in one place. But
there was mostly Mexican. Seemed like Mexican
went to that more than anything else. Do you have
any idea why that was the case? I don't know. They
are. They, they, they, they do pretty good on that.
Say, we'd come to town, we got dogs, we'd It was sad.
They had down the streets a big crowd of people that
you couldn't quite understand around.
What kind of, what did the Mexicans do for
entertainment? Oh, they had these, it was the 5th
of May. They had a big, the company built them a big
outfit, a big civilian-like, and they'd have an
entertainment. 16th of September is when they'd
celebrate, and 5th of May, boy, they'd just have a
hell of a time. They'd all get together. They all
play music? Yeah, they had the Mexican music,
guitar and accordion and fiddle. Was there very
much give and take between the people at the mines
and the people in town in Rockville, or was it just
on weekends? It was just on weekends.
They were all busy working through the week, all
the way through the week, very seldom. They got
pretty bad after the war was over. It got kind of
bad, and they didn't work but one or two days a week.
And they'd lay off and try to catch some of them
else. They'd take a bunch of kids, you know, and
they'd miss them. Days they didn't work, they'd go
out and these farmers would come after them, pick
the cotton them days. They had about three or four
gins in Rockdale. They had to oil them in with gin,
you know. Could you make more money picking cotton
than you could mining? Well, them that had a bunch
of kids, they could. But the biggest part of them,
you know, they'd get these, they'd have them
little hack, because people would come after the
men at work in the mines, and the women folks would
take the kids, and they'd pick these farmers'
cotton. They'd come get them and carry them back
every evening. My wife's kid done the same thing
after they got going. She weighed lots of cotton.
How young? What was the youngest miner that you saw
down in the mines? Well that... Did the companies
have an age limit or...? They had these uh, you mean
they owned the mine? Right. Well they was all old
people. See Yoakum's was old. They had a little
shaft mine over there. They was the first one to
put, to put the mine down. The Yoakum's were? Yeah,
old man Yoakum. Then it went from when old man Vogel
come over here. He made a shaft mine down there.
Slope mine, what you call it, you know. It started
at the top and go down. He's the one that started it
and then they got to put down these shaft mines
straight. They'd have these elevators, you know.
They had two drums. One of them go up and the other
one go down. It'd be a double, it'd operate, you
know. And everything that operated in them days
were boilers and steam.
At the same time over there, we had about 85 or 90
messengers that were reloading from 25 to 15, 20
flats a day. And they'd have a little old
locomotive come out there and bring them to the
empties, pull out the full ones. They had scales
down here in Rockdale. They'd weigh it, whatever
it is. Wherever they'd sell it, they'd distribute
it out. There's trains that carry them out where
they used it. oil mills used lignite then, and all
these gins used lignite. It had lots of trucks come
down and truck it out before it wasn't too far.
They'd load these trucks and charge them so much a
ton, and they'd deliver to these oil mills.
How did the commissary system work? Did you get
paid in cash, and did the Mexicans get paid in cash?
When we first started, they paid cash. We had these
old big silver dollars. Maybe they'd give you
five, six of them. You'd have a pocket full of
silver dollars. I mean, they was silver dollars,
too. They paid you all cash. But after things got to
tight over there, they went to these coal miners.
Owners went to give them checks. You'd have to go to
the bank. Go to the bank? Yeah, you'd buy the
groceries. They'd sell you the groceries on
credit, and they'd take it off your payday for
whatever you got coming. And that was pretty
reasonable with them groceries. But you never did
work with what we call company script? No. You
never did that?
Do you think the mines were fairly safe, or were
they pretty dangerous? Well, there's not as much
of danger in these coal mines as it is up north, you
know, where they have all these explosions and
everything. If one would get killed, it would be
just some rock or something fall on him. But first
concerns come closing, a whole bunch of them. Now
when that mine was filled with water, the M7,
that's the only one that I ever know of that was
trapped in the mine. And they got them alive, all
out. Mr. Beathard said that one of her relatives,
one of her friends, I forget which, was run over by a
coal car one time. Yeah. Them several of them get
killed over there. How would that happen? They
just let them fall, or? Well, I tell you, they'd get
in between them cars and sometimes downhill a
little bit, and they didn't have no brakes on them.
I tell you what, they'd make these little sticks
about that long. And when you started downhill,
they'd unhook the mule, stick two or three of them
sticks in them wheels, and that'll lock them
wheels. And he was down there looking, trying to
get that and another bunch to run into, and that's
what killed him. Did that happen very often? No.
Let's see, in the time I was there, there wasn't but
three Mexicans in the whole time I was there. And I
was down near there all the time that mine was
there. Which would be from what, about 1895? To
what, 1935? Or did you work up through... Well, in
1933,
that's when they was, you know, all closing down.
Was that due to the depression? That was over
there. That's when I, in 36,
when the one mine left, that gentleman there,
that's what you call it, that old coffee loan's all
back there now. He's the only one left. He finally
had to take out when that calc fuel company in here,
when they overloaded everything, had them
shelves. So everything down this way had all these
shag mines had to close up. I see. Well, how did the
Depression affect you? I mean, you were a miner all
your life. How did the Depression, you know, 1929,
1930, affect you? Well, that was it. It was pretty
good them days. You got along all right? Oh, heck
yeah. You worked all the way through, huh? Yeah.
So, what about the Mexican families? Did they
work? Yeah, just like I tell you, when times would
get bad, some days they wouldn't work until they
would go away. They had these little old gardens.
They'd raise little corn and stuff. They'd always
have a little garden back behind the house. The
company let them live there. If they wanted to go
somewhere and work, they could live there. But
when the mines started up again, they wanted them
to come back. Would you say generally that the
miners got along with the owners of the mine
company? Oh, yeah. There were no labor problems or
strikes or anything that you can remember? They
never had no strike that I know of. Why do you think
they worked? Well, they couldn't strike because
they never did make enough money. They had to keep
working. I see. I tell you, sometimes when they had
them feces, like they was making pretty good
money, they'd have them feces. Fifth of May or 16th
of September, they'd need to lignite, and some of
them would get drunk, lay off three or four days.
Well, the owners didn't like that. And then it all
was over. There wasn't anything you could do about
it. They'd finally all come back, one or two at a
time, and go back to work. But that's the only time
they never did. They never had no strike. Well,
they wasn't able to strike. There wasn't no union
or anything. Nobody came down from the North to try
to unionize?
No. I noticed reading some of the history that the
Peacocks clan sprung up again in the early 1920s.
Did they bother the mines at all, or the people who
worked at the mines?
Did any of the Mexican miners go off to fight in
World War I that you know of? They, they sort of took
three or four of them. But the biggest part of them
all, they'd come from Mexico and they wasn't
American. Yeah, a bunch of them went, a bunch of
these young boys that went, that their parents
brought them over here. Yeah, they got a whole
bunch of them young boys. Had they, the Mexicans
that were brought over to mine, had they mined in
Mexico before they came here? Well, they claimed
there was mines in Mexico. But they didn't have
much to do over there because they couldn't sell
the coal. I see. Well, did it take skilled labor to
mine the lignite mines? Well, they just used
anybody that come along to steal labor. That's all
they used. What kind of tools did they use? They
used these big scoops and picks. That's all they
used. Scoops would be a shovel? Shovel and a pick.
They had each point on each side. They'd dig that
coal. that the tunnel would be about four or five
foot wide and six or seven foot high. And they just
wouldn't dig the whole ding out because it would
cave in on them. Maybe they'd go a little piece this
way, turn it off over here, turn it off over there,
turn it off over here. Sort of like the branches of
the tree. Yeah, the branches over there. And when
they'd get to the end of the land, then they'd go to
work. They'd use this timber. Mm-hmm. They'd cut
trees and brace it up, and just maybe sometime
bigger than this house, they'd have it all sitting
on timber, not nothing but the timber on it. And
then it started to crack it and pop, and they knew
what had happened. They'd back off before it'd
fall in, then they'd start in again. Yeah, it
worked out pretty nice. Well, did everybody seem
to get along with everybody else? Well, once in a
while they'd have a little fight or something.
Didn't many of them, I don't know. There wasn't any
racial problems? No, no. Them days you could get by
with just anything. They'd have fights as long as
they didn't kill one another, cut up one another.
Oh, there was plenty of fights out there. What did
they fight about? Did they fight over coal or did
they fight over women? No, they didn't fight over
coal. You'd get drunk and fight each other. Just to
be fighting? Yeah, they didn't ever fight over the
job or nothing. Was there ever a time when you
weren't mining yourself? When you weren't
working at the Mines, were you ever a farmer? No, I
never did farm. See, my daddy brought me, I raised
them coal mine, brought me. I was 16 years old when I
went to work. I worked, I guess, until they closed
up. And what did you do after that? Well, after
that, after they closed up,
I went to work for a fellow to move people, driving a
truck. Moving company, huh? Mm-hmm. I worked for
them two or three years, and then he got into bad
shape. He had the TB, and he had to quit, and his wife
got mad and hit him. Then I went to work for the city,
and I worked for the city about eight years. And I
got mad at them one day. That's when the alcohol
come in here. That strip mine come in here. And I
asked them for a raise. They wouldn't give me a
raise. They wouldn't give me 75 cents an hour. So
they wouldn't give me no raise. And I went to 36. I
went to work for 37. I went to work strip mine. I'd
get the alcohol where the alcohol was on. I went to
work. I worked out there. In 36 to 48, that's when
they had to close down and the alcohol come in here.
The interpreter at the wedding? Yeah, and I
interpreted four or five of them. And these were
young fellas that did not learn English then?
Yeah.
You just picked up the Spanish on your own? No, I
messed around with these kids, you know, coal
miners, women owners. I just picked it up. Now, my
brother got a good education, but he was already
grown. He got to be formed down there in the old gold
mine.
I forget what year that was when that boiler
exploded. That's when they, but they had steps
that men could get out, you see that? Was that right
at the turn of the century, wasn't it? Wasn't it
right at the turn of the century? I don't know what
year that was. That launch bar ought to know. I
don't know if he
knows or not. This tape is continued on the other
side.